arXiv:2004.11938v1 [cs.LG] 24 Apr 2020

Towards Differentiable Resampling
Michael Zhu 1

Kevin Murphy

Rico Jonschkowski

Stanford
mhzhu@stanford.edu

Google AI
kpmurphy@google.com

Robotics at Google
rjon@google.com

Abstract—Resampling is a key component of sample-based
recursive state estimation in particle filters. Recent work explores differentiable particle filters for end-to-end learning [2, 3].
However, resampling remains a challenge in these works, as it
is inherently non-differentiable. We address this challenge by
replacing traditional resampling with a learned neural network
resampler. We present a novel network architecture, the particle transformer, and train it for particle resampling using a
likelihood-based loss function over sets of particles. Incorporated
into a differentiable particle filter, our model can be end-to-end
optimized jointly with the other particle filter components via
gradient descent. Our results show that our learned resampler
outperforms traditional resampling techniques on synthetic data
and in a simulated robot localization task.

I. I NTRODUCTION
State estimation, estimating the posterior distribution of the
current state given past observations and actions, remains a
key problem in robotics. This problem is often addressed with
particle filters [1, 5], which approximate the posterior by a
set of weighted samples (particles) that are updated at each
time step. Particles are moved according to the predictions
of a motion model for the current action, and their weights
are updated based on a measurement model that estimates the
likelihood of the current observation for each particle. Finally,
particles are resampled according to their weights to focus the
approximation of the posterior to regions of high probability.
Traditionally, particle filters required manually defined or
individually learned motion and measurement models.
Recent work on differentiable particle filters (DPFs) [2, 3]
replaces traditionally handcrafted models by neural networks
and implements the particle filter algorithm in a way that
allows computing the gradient by differentiation. As a result,
DPFs can optimize models for end-to-end state estimation by
gradient descent. DPFs can also be viewed as recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) that leverage the problem structure in state
estimation to improve data efficiency and generalization [2].
Albeit promising results, DPFs are limited by the inherently
non-differentiable resampling step. That step is necessary
because repeatedly updating the positions and weights of
particles eventually leads to a degeneracy problem where
most particles have close to zero weight, and only a few
of the particles are useful for approximating the posterior.
To mitigate this problem, particles are randomly resampled
with replacement according to their weights to generate
a uniformly-weighted particle set that represents the same
1 This work was done while at Robotics at Google.

posterior, which is then used as a prior for the next time step.
The resampled particles are differentiable with respect to the
poses of the input particles from which they were copied (their
ancestors), but they are not differentiable with respect to the
input weights. For this reason, traditional resampling does not
allow backpropagating the gradient in differentiable particle
filters across multiple time steps. Previous work avoids this
issue by truncating backpropagation after a single step [2],
by training without any resampling when possible (e.g. for
tracking from a known state) [3], or by soft resampling [3],
which trades resampling quality for a biased gradient estimate
(see Section III-A). As none of these measures solve the
differentiability problem, we investigate replacing traditional
resampling with a learned neural network resampler.
In addition to enabling differentiability, our approach also
raises an important question: Is traditional resampling optimal
for state estimation, especially when models are learned endto-end? For example, it is known in practice [8, p. 118] and
has been found empirically through end-to-end learning [2]
that particle filters perform best if motion and measurement
models overestimate the noise of the system. One reason why
this might help is that it increases robustness to unmodeled
effects. But increased noise might also help by compensating
for approximation errors from particle resampling.
Since resampling produces exact copies of highly weighted
particles, the motion model must be noisy to spread these
particles out to enable the measurement update to assign different weights to them, even if the true motion is deterministic.
One could imagine an alternative way of resampling that does
not duplicate particles but instead interpolates between them
to spread particles out from the start, which might reduce
the required noise in the motion model. Although importance
resampling is optimal under certain assumptions [8], it is an
intriguing question if there is a form of resampling that works
better empirically (where some assumptions might not hold).
Our contributions are: (1) We replace existing resampling
mechanisms with a neural network to enable differentiability
and to study whether learned models can outperform traditional
resampling. (2) We present the particle transformer, a new
network architecture tailored to particle resampling. (3) We
present two ways of training this model to perform resampling
using (3a) a likelihood-based loss function between sets of
particles and (3b) end-to-end training of the resampling model
as part of the differentiable particle filter. Our experiments
show that the learned model outperforms existing resampling
methods on synthetic data and in a simulated localization task.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Differentiable Particle Filters [2] and Particle Filter Networks [3] combine the particle filter algorithm with learnable
motion and measurement models and end-to-end training by
gradient descent. Particle Filter RNNs [6] generalize this
approach beyond classical state estimation problems through
an architecture that is closer to vanilla RNNs but maintains a
particle-based latent distribution instead of a latent vector. As
discussed in the introduction and in Section III-A, differentiable
resampling remains a key challenge, which our work addresses
by proposing to learn resampling in a neural network.
Neural networks can model point sets by first applying
point-wise transformations and then aggregating the resulting
point features by pooling [7, 10]. Set transformers [4] build
on these ideas and use a permutation-invariant encoderdecoder architecture that leverages multi-head attention [9]. Our
work extends set transformers for resampling by introducing
weighted attention and scale-equivariance.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Resampling in Particle Filters
Particle filters recursively estimate the posterior probability
over states, given a sequence of observations and actions.
They represent this posterior by a set of weighted samples
{x(i) , w(i) }ni=1 , also called particles, where x(i) ∈ Rd represents the d-dimensional sample position and w(i) ∈ R
represents
the normalized particle weight for particle i such that
Pn
(i)
w
= 1. Repeated motion and measurement updates
i=1
without resampling would spread out particles and reduce
most weights until only a few particles have non-negligible
weight, at which point the particle set is degenerated and
cannot properly estimate the posterior anymore. Resampling
addresses this problem by focusing particles in high-probability
regions [8]. Traditional particle filters use multinomial or
systematic resampling. Soft resampling is a differentiable
version of these ideas [3]. All of these methods perform
resampling by removing or duplicating existing particles.
Multinomial resampling draws particles with replacement
according to the discrete distribution represented by the particle
weights. Systematic resampling (also stochastic universal sampling) turns the particle weights into a cumulative distribution,
uniformly samples an offset δ ∈ [0, n1 ), and draws particles
whenever their component of the cumulative distribution
includes δ + nk for integers k ∈ [0, n − 1]. By introducing
a dependency between the generated samples, this procedure
increases stability of the particle set as every particle with
normalized weight > nc is guaranteed to be sampled at least
c times. Soft resampling [3] is a differentiable approximation
that performs multinomial resampling on a mixture of the
weight distribution and a uniform distribution, and then mixes
the weights of the sampled ancestors into the uniform weights
of the resampled particles. This makes the weight of the
resampled particle differentiable with respect to the weight
of its ancestor. Unfortunately, soft resamplng biases both the
resampling process and the estimated gradients, and it only
provides gradients for input particles that were sampled.

B. Transformer / Set Transformer Models
The transformer [9] model is a neural network architecture
centered around an attention function that maps a query and
a set of key-value pairs to a weighted sum of values, where
each weight is computed as the similarity between query
and key (further described in Section IV-A). The transformer
model generalizes this idea to multi-head attention by linearly
projecting each query, key, and value in h different ways,
applying the attention function to all h query-key-value triplets,
concatenating the results, and linearly projecting them again.
Transformers interleave multi-head attention with point-wise
feed-forward layers, residual connections, and layer normalization into an encoder-decoder architecture. When applied to
natural language processing, input words are represented with
learned embeddings and encodings of their position.
The set transformer [4] model extends the transformer to
leverage attention for learning interactions in point sets. To
achieve permutation-invariance on the input set, this model
omits positional encodings. On the decoder side, the set
transformer proposes pooling by multi-head attention (PMA),
which uses k learnable vectors as seeds for queries in multihead attention. The decoder aggregates the encoder outputs
using PMA with k seed vectors, multi-head self-attention, and
point-wise feed-forward layers to generate k outputs.
IV. PARTICLE T RANSFORMERS FOR
D IFFERENTIABLE R ESAMPLING
A. Particle Transformer
We propose the particle transformer, a neural network
architecture for particle resampling that is both permutationinvariant and scale-equivariant, and incorporates particle
weights in the attention mechanism. Our model builds on
the set transformer [4] described above. However, instead of
mapping a set of n points to k output vectors, our model
maps a set of n weighted points to a new set of n points and
leverages additional problem structure in particle resampling
by incorporating scale-equivariance and weighted attention.
To appropriately model particle weights, we introduce a
weighted attention mechanism that generalizes dot-product
attention. Suppose we have a query vector q ∈ Rdk and
m pairs of keys k(i) ∈ Rdk and values v (i) ∈ Rdv
for i ∈ [1,
m]. The scaled
dot-product attention function
Pm
(i) √
/ dk )v (i)
i=1 exp(q·k
√
computes Pm
. We generalize this function
exp(q·k(j) / d )
j=1

k

to incorporate weights
w(i) ∈ R for each
of the m key-value
√
Pm
w(i) exp(q·k(i) / dk )v (i)
(i)
(i)
i=1
pairs k , v to Pm w(j) exp(q·k(j) /√d ) . We extend this
k
j=1
idea to weighted multi-head attention by using multiple keyvalue-query triplets as in multi-head attention [9].
Our model uses weighted and vanilla multi-head attention
as shown in Figure 1. The encoder takes as input a set of n
weighted vectors {x(i) , w(i) }ni=1 , scales each input dimension
based on their minima and maxima to [−1, 1], then linearly
transforms each vector into a latent representation. It then
twice applies weighted multi-head self-attention and pointwise
feed-forward layers. Up to this point, each encoded vector is

Output points

C. Individual and End-to-End Training with Particle Filters

Undo scaling
Pointwise linear

Encoder

2x

Add
Pointwise 2-layer
feed forward

Add
Weighted multihead attention

Add
Weighted multiWeigthed
head attention

Add
Multi-head
attention

Pointwise linear
Rescale to [-1, 1]
Input points

Add
Pointwise 2-layer
feed forward
Decoder

2x

Seed vectors

Weights

Fig. 1. Particle transformer architecture. Multi-head attention modules take
three inputs: key, value, and query (left to right). Seed vectors are learned.

still associated with its original weight. The decoder takes these
encoded particles as input, together with n learned vectors z (i)
that act as “seed vectors” [4], to generate n new particles. The
decoder applies the following twice: multi-head self-attention,
weighted multi-head attention – where encoded particles are
used to compute keys and values and the decoder latents are
used to compute queries – and pointwise feed-forward layers.
The resulting n vectors are linearly transformed to match
the input dimensionality and rescaled per dimension to their
original minima and maxima. Throughout the model we use a
latent dimension of 256 and multi-head attention with 8 heads.
B. Loss Function for Individual Training
After having introduced the particle transformer, which
maps n weighted particles to n equally-weighted particles,
we will now define the loss function for training this model
for resampling. The idea is to maximize the likelihood
of a set of target particles conditioned on the resampled
particles. To convert a set of particles into a probability density
function, we apply kernel density estimation and compute a
mixture of Gaussians (with one Gaussian per particle) [2].
Let qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) be the Gaussian mixture distribution
of the n particles resampled by the model with parameters
θ from input particles {x(i) , w(i) }ni=1 and let {y (i) , v (i) }ni=1
denote a set of target particles. The loss can be derived from
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the predicted
and the target distributions (see Appendix A). It sums the
appropriately weighted q’s at the positions of the n target
particles
L(θ) = −

n
X

v (i)
Pn
log qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) (y (i) ).
(j)
v
j=1
i=1

(1)

As target particle sets, we use either (i) the input particles
{x(i) , w(i) }ni=1 or (ii) the output of a traditional resampler
on that input. Note that (i) only works because the particle
transformer is constrained to output uniformly weighted
particles, which prevents it from learning the identity mapping.

To study the interaction of differentiable resampling with
end-to-end training in particle filters, we integrate our particle
transformer with prior work on differentiable particle filters
(DPFs) [2]. We follow their recipe of training all particle
filter components first individually and then end-to-end. Since
individual training of the resampler requires examples of sets of
input and target particles, we collect such a dataset by running
the filter with individually trained motion and measurement
models and a standard resampler on the problem of interest.
Collecting these examples in the particle filter ensures that the
training distribution of particle sets is similar to the distribution
encountered during filtering. The exact steps for individual
and end-to-end training are:
1) Individually train the motion and measurement models.
2) Run the particle filter from 1) with a standard resampler.
Collect the resampler’s input and output particle sets.
3) Using the training examples from step 2), individually
train the particle transformer for resampling.
4) Train the DPF end-to-end to jointly optimize the motion
model, the measurement model, and the resampler.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Synthetic Data
We first compare the particle transformer to other resampling
techniques on a synthetic dataset of particle sets. We create
this dataset by randomly generating pairs of probability
distributions, one to generate samples and one to assign weights
to those samples. We define these distributions as mixtures
of three Gaussians in five-dimensional space, and randomly
draw means from [-5, 5] and standard deviations from [1, 3]
for each dimension. We sample mixture probabilities from
[0.2, 0.4] for the first two Gaussians, which determine the
probability of the last Gaussian such that all three sum to one.
We use 32 particles drawn from these distributions as both
input and target sets, and generate and generate 60k particle
sets – 50k for training, 10k for evaluation.
Figure 2 shows qualitative results of the particle transformer
in a one-dimensional slice of the five-dimensional distribution
(inputs are orange, outputs are blue). Output particles are
constrained to have equal weights to force them to focus
on high-probability regions. Although this constraint hinders
approximating the input distribution, the resampled particles
capture all modes. Note that unlike traditional resampling
techniques that replicate or remove particles, our learned
resampler places particles where there were no input particles,
which increases particle diversity (e.g. in the rightmost mode).
Figure 3 compares the particle transformer to other resampling techniques – multinomial resampling, systematic
resampling, and soft resampling – in terms of the loss defined
in Equation 1 on the evaluation set. We compute this loss for
different values of the kernel bandwidth, which controls the
width of the Gaussians centered at each of the particles for
estimating q. The results show that the particle transformer
achieves the lowest loss for all kernel bandwidths, especially

Fig. 2. Qualitative results on synthetic data (one of five dimensions shown). Circles denote particle positions and weights. Lines show kernel density estimates.

Multinomial resampling
Soft resampling
Systematic resampling
Particle Transformer

0.8
Test Loss

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
Fig. 3.

0.025

0.050

0.075

0.100 0.125 0.150
Kernel Bandwidth

0.175

0.200

Comparison of different resampling methods on synthetic data.

TABLE I
PARTICLE FILTER RESULTS FOR INDIVIDUAL → END - TO - END TRAINING
Resampling method

Error rate at last time step MSE at last time step

No resampling
Soft resampling
Soft resampling (with BPTT)
Systematic resampling
Particle transformer (frozen)
Particle transformer

70.0±0.3% → 58.0±0.3%
11.4±0.4% → 6.9±0.2%
11.4±0.4% → 6.6±0.2%
7.0±0.2% → 4.9±0.1%
12.0±0.7% → 4.7±0.2%
12.0±0.7% → 1.2±0.2%

7.0±0.2 → 3.5±0.03
4.9±0.2 → 5.7±0.2
4.9±0.2 → 5.5±0.2
2.9±0.2 → 3.9±0.1
2.6±0.1 → 2.3±0.08
2.6±0.1 → 0.38±0.06

for small bandwidths, where it achieves a loss of about -0.2
compared to 0.3 to 0.8 for the other methods. Multinomial
resampling, which is most aggressive at removing particles,
fares poorly in this setting. Soft resampling that mixes weights
with a uniform distribution provides a small improvement.
Systematic resampling, which keeps input particles above
a certain weight, works better yet. However, our learned
resampling strategy – which is not constrained to replicate or
remove particles – substantially outperforms all other methods.
B. Differentiable Resampling for Particle Filters
To test our learned resampler in a particle filter, we
consider the problem of robot localization in a simulated
maze environment. As the robot moves through the maze,
the goal is to estimate the robot’s pose from a sequence of
camera observations and odometry measurements. We use the
dataset and the differentiable particle filter implementation
from Jonschkowski et al. [2], but use their particle proposer
network only to initialize particles in the first time step. For
all other steps, we resample all 100 particles with the particle
transformer (or other methods, when we compare to those).
We train all particle filter components first individually and
then optimize them end-to-end as described in Section IV-C.
In this experiment we stop gradients across time steps such
that there is no backpropagation through time (BPTT), save

for soft resampling which we evaluate with and without BPTT.
Systematic resampling method does not allow BPTT as it is
not differentiable. Particle transformers are designed to provide
gradients for BPTT, but are currently limited in this regard
due to exploding gradients (see Appendix B).
Table I shows the test results for different resampling
algorithms for two metrics, error rate and mean-squared error
(MSE), evaluated after individual training, and then again
after additional end-to-end training. All results are given with
standard errors from five independent trials in Maze 1 [2].
The resulting error rates show that resampling is crucial for
this localization problem with error rate reductions from 70%
to 7% after individual training and from 58% to 1.2% after
end-to-end training. We also see that systematic resampling
consistently outperforms soft resampling (7% vs. 11.4% and
4.9% vs. 6.6%), and we see only a minor benefit from the
BPTT with soft resampling (6.6% vs. 6.9%), potentially due
to biased gradients as described in Section III-A. Systematic
resampling also outperforms our learned resampler if all models
(resampling, motion model, and measurement model) are
trained individually (7% vs. 12%), apparently because the
individual learning objectives for the motion and measurement
models are more aligned with this traditional way of resampling.
The results change, however, after end-to-end training. When
we train the motion and measurement models end-to-end (but
freeze the resampling model), our model achieves comparable
error (4.7% vs. 4.9%) rates and lower mean squared errors
(2.3 vs. 3.9). If we additionally train the resampling model
end-to-end, the results improve substantially again. Compared
to systematic resampling, our model reduces the error rate
from 4.9% to 1.2% and the mean squared errors from 3.9 to
0.38 (qualitative results in Appendix C).
VI. C ONCLUSION
We have shown progress towards differentiable resampling
in particle filters and tested whether learned models can provide
better resampling than traditional approaches. To explore
learning for the resampling problem, we introduced the particle
transformer, a permutation-invariant and scale-equivariant
model with weighted attention that can be optimized for end-toend state estimation. Our results show that this learned model
substantially outperforms traditional resampling methods on
synthetic data and in a simulated localization task. Future work
is needed to enable backpropagation through time in order to
realize the full potential of differentiable resampling.

TABLE II
DPF TEST RESULTS WITH GRADIENT STOPPING EVERY k STEPS

A PPENDIX
A. Derivation of loss function
We derive the loss function for one training example as
follows. Let p be the target distribution specified by the
probability measure of the n particle positions and their
associated weights {y (i) , v (i) }ni=1 ,
p(y) =

n
X

v (i)
Pn
δ (i) (y),
(j) y
j=1 v
i=1

where δy(i) (y) denotes the Dirac delta function located at y (i) ,
the position of particle i.
Let qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) be the Gaussian kernel density estimate (mixture distribution) of the n particles output by the
particle transformer with parameters θ and input particles
{x(i) , w(i) }ni=1 . We want to minimize the KL divergence
between p and qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) , or equivalently the cross
entropy

Resampler frozen

Resampler not frozen

k

Error rate

Error rate

1
3
5

4.7±0.2% 2.3±0.1
4.3±0.2% 2.1±0.1
9.9±0.2% 2.8±0.1

MSE

MSE

1.2±0.2% 0.4±0.1
4.9±0.3% 1.8±0.1
10.6±0.6% 2.5±0.2

TABLE III
DPF TEST RESULTS WITH GRADIENT CLIPPING AND GRADIENT STOPPING
EVERY k STEPS

k

Resampler frozen

Resampler not frozen

1
2
3
4
5

4.7±0.2%
3.5±0.1%
3.7±0.2%
3.9±0.1%
4.4±0.1%

1.1±0.07%
1.2±0.14%
1.9±0.2%
5.4±1.6%
9.8±0.1%

min KL(pkqrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) ) = min H(pkqrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) ).
θ

θ

Hence, our loss function for one training example is
Z
L(θ) = − p(x) log qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) (x)dx
n
X

v (i)
Pn
log qrθ ({x(i) ,w(i) }ni=1 ) (y (i) ).
(j)
v
j=1
i=1

B. Towards Enabling Backpropagation Through Time
Since the particle transformer is fully differentiable, it in
principle supports end-to-end learning with backpropagation
through time (BPTT), i.e., we can unroll differentiable particle
filters with particle transformer resampling across multiple
time steps and have the gradients flow through the learned
resampling mechanism to estimate how model parameters at
time t affect particle filter outputs at time t + d. This is exactly
what motivated our work in the first place – optimizing all
particle filter components for their effect on all future time steps.
Unfortunately, BPTT does not improve performance, which is
why we stopped gradients from flowing across time steps when
we evaluated end-to-end training of the particle transformer in
the differentiable particle filter (shown in Table I).
To better understand this issue, we performed experiments
with and without freezing the resampler during end-to-end
training, where we stopped gradients every k time steps. I.e.,
we stop the gradients after resampling at step t if t mod k ==
0. The results for k ∈ {1, 3, 5} in Table II show that if we
freeze the resampler, performing this form of truncated BPTT
with k = 3 improves performance over stopping gradients at
every time step, which supports the idea that gradients across
time can be beneficial for end-to-end training. For larger k,
or if we update the parameters of the (not frozen) resampler
during end-to-end training, we see that performance degrades
with higher k. The k = 5 error rates of 9.9% and 10.6%
suggest that end-to-end training is unstable because end-to-end
training leads to only a slight improvement from the error rate
of 12% for individual training that we saw in Table I.

105
104
Gradient Norm

=−

106

103
102
101

Encoder
Particle Proposer
Obs Like Estimator
Mo Noise Generator
Set Transformer

100
10 1
2

4

6
8
10
12
14
16
Stop Gradient Time Step Interval

18

20

Fig. 4. Median gradient norms for different DPF components as a function
of k, the number of time steps after which BPTT is truncated.

Suspecting exploding gradients to cause this instability, we
analyzed how the median gradient norms for DPF components
depend on k (see Figure 4). Note the logarithmic scale on the
y-axis – the gradient norms are almost exponential in k.
To solve this problem, we clipped the gradient norms at 10,
which produced the results in Table III. Comparing these results
to Table II shows that gradient clipping generally improves
performance, e.g. for k = 3 error rates reduce from 4.3% to
3.7% (resampler frozen) and from 4.9% to 1.9% (not frozen).
With gradient clipping, BPTT for k ∈ {2, 3, 4} provides
a substantial improvement over k = 1 if the resampler is
frozen during end-to-end training. However, performance still
deteriorates with larger k and when the resampler is not frozen.
The best results are still obtained by training the resampler endto-end with k = 1, i.e. not performing BPTT. While gradient
clipping shows promise, more work is needed to properly
train differentiable particle filters with particle transformers
end-to-end across multiple time steps.

(a) Input

(b) Systematic resampling

(c) Particle transformer

(d) Input

(e) Systematic resampling

(f) Particle transformer

0.00

0.01
Particle weight

0.02

Fig. 5. Qualitative results on two example particle sets in 2D position and angle. For a given input particle set (left), we show outputs of systematic resampling
(middle) and the particle transformer (right). Particles are colored by their weights.

C. Qualitative Results
We show quantitatively in Table I that resampling with an
end-to-end learned particle transformer leads to significantly
better performance in the simulated localization task than using
systematic resampling. To understand what the learned model
does differently from the traditional resampler, we will now
take a look at qualitative results.
Figure 5 shows a side-by-side qualitative comparison of
systematic resampling and resampling with the particle transformer for two examples. In the first example (top row), the
input (a) consists of a set of highly weighted (purple) particles
at the top and particles with weights close to zero (yellow)
at the bottom. The results show that both the systematic
resampler and the particle transformer sample most particles
from the highly weighted region. But while the systematic
resampler discards the regions of low weight entirely, the
particle transformer produces a few samples there. In the
second example (bottom row), the distribution of input particles
(d) is multimodal. Compared to systematic resampling, we
again see that the particle transformer places particles in regions
without highly weighted inputs. Additionally, the particle
transformer produces a more diverse set of particles near the
modes of the distribution.
It is plausible that generating additional particles in low
weight regions and producing a more diverse particle set may

increase robustness to modelling errors. As the motion and
measurement models are learned from data, particles can, for
example, get incorrectly weighted very low if the current
combination of observation and state has not been seen during
training. Particle transformers might improve performance by
providing more robustness to these problems than traditional
resampling methods.
Figure 6 shows one representative example of how increased
robustness can have a major effect for the multi-step filtering
process. We show particle filtering on the same sequence of
observations and actions, once with systematic resampling (a),
and once with the particle transformer (b). Both filtering runs
start with a similar initial set of particles in step one (top
left maze) and estimate a multi-modal posterior with roughly
three modes in steps two and three. At step three, the more
diverse set of particles in (b) allowed some particles near
the true pose to receive high weights, while the weights in
(a) are very focused on the wrong hypothesis (which from
the local perspective of the robot looks indistinguishable). At
step four, the particle filter with the traditional resampler (a)
places almost no particles near the true pose and subsequently
is not able to locate the robot. The particle filter with the
learned resampler (b) distributes most particles across both
valid hypotheses at step four, which later allows it to pick the
correct one and track that hypothesis successfully.

(a) Systematic resampling

(b) Particle transformer
0.00

0.01
Particle weight

0.02

Fig. 6. Visualization of the particle filter for robot localization (top-down view) on the same data with two different resampling methods. There are 19 time
steps in total, 5 per row, with the last box summarizing the trajectories of the particle filter estimate (green) and the true robot pose (red). The true robot position
and angle at each time step are shown by the black circle and red arrow. The particles colored by their weight represent the belief over where the robot is.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Anelia Angelova and Vincent
Vanhoucke for their helpful comments on this work and Chad
Richards for editing and proofreading the manuscript.
R EFERENCES
[1] Neil J Gordon, David J Salmond, and Adrian FM Smith.
Novel approach to nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian state
estimation. IEE Proceedings F (Radar and Signal
Processing), 140(2):107–113, 1993.
[2] Rico Jonschkowski, Divyam Rastogi, and Oliver Brock.
Differentiable particle filters: End-to-end learning with
algorithmic priors. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science
and Systems, 2018.
[3] Peter Karkus, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee. Particle
filter networks with application to visual localization. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning, pages
169–178, 2018.
[4] Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek,
Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set transformer:
A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant
neural networks. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3744–3753,
2019.

[5] Jun S Liu and Rong Chen. Sequential Monte Carlo
methods for dynamic systems. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 93(443):1032–1044, 1998.
[6] Xiao Ma, Peter Karkus, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee.
Particle filter recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.12885, 2019.
[7] Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J
Guibas. PointNet: Deep learning on point sets for
3D classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 652–660, 2017.
[8] Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox.
Probabilistic robotics. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
2005.
[9] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 5998–6008, 2017.
[10] Manzil Zaheer, Satwik Kottur, Siamak Ravanbakhsh,
Barnabas Poczos, Ruslan R Salakhutdinov, and Alexander J Smola. Deep sets. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 3391–3401, 2017.

